.NET + Azure Cognitive Services blog post (#1004)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2021-12-20-net-azure-cognitive-services.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Using Azure Cognitive Services in a .NET App"
author: alisa-duncan
by: advocate
communities: [.net]
description: "This tutorial shows you how to call Azure Cognitive Services to verify faces and store profiles pics in Azure Storage in a .NET MVC app."
tags: [dotnet, dotnetcore, csharp, aspnet, aspnetcore, dotnet5, azure]
tweets:
- "Snap a selfie! 📸  Analyze and detect faces using #azure cognitive services in this #dotnet app!" 
- "Are you who you say you are? Analyze and detect faces using #azure cognitive services in this #dotnet app! 💻"
- ""
image: blog/net-azure-cognitive-services/azure-cognitive-services-social.jpg
type: conversion
---

[Azure Cognitive Services](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/cognitive-services/) is a collection of cloud-based AI products from Microsoft Azure to add cognitive intelligence into your applications quickly. With Azure Cognitive Services, you can add AI capabilities using pre-trained models, so you don't need machine learning or data science experience. Azure Cognitive Services has vision, speech, language, and decision-making services.

> In this article, you will learn how to use the Vision service's [Face](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/face/) library to perform facial analysis in a .NET MVC application and store user profile pictures in [Azure Blob Container Storage](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/storage/blobs/). You'll also authenticate with Okta and store user data as custom profile attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, you will learn how to use the [Face service](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/face/) library to perform facial analysis in a .NET MVC application and store user profile pictures in [Azure Blob Container Storage](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/storage/blobs/). You'll also authenticate with Okta and store user data as custom profile attributes.
```
Not seeing any reference to "Vision" per se.

Author: @havi I was drawing from Azure Cognitive Services site, where they define service categories (Speech, Language, Vision, Decision) to match with the last sentence of the paragraph above.

But maybe it doesn't have to be that specific and "Face AP"I is enough? (I don't know how I feel about "Face library"). Here's a screenshot of Azure's site with their offerings categorized. Thoughts?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/7586237/149039861-3c2fff5e-c62d-4a63-9eaf-df9788c04800.png)

Reviewer 2: "In this article, you will learn how to use the Vision [Face API](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/face/)"

Is my two cents.

Reviewer: Thanks both! I think Heather's two cents nails it  - I didn't spot the word "Vision" anywhere when I landed on the "cognitive-services/face/" page so I thought that naming might have changed.

> At the end of this post, you can upload a profile picture in your app and get information about image error conditions, such as when zero or more than one face is detected or when your facial features don't match a new picture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the end of this post, you'll be able to upload a profile picture in your app and get information about image error conditions, such as when zero or more than one face is detected or when your facial features don't match a new picture.
```
clarity

* Your favorite IDE that supports .NET projects, such as [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/), [Visual Studio for Mac](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/mac/), [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), or [JetBrains Rider](https://www.jetbrains.com/rider/)
* [Okta CLI](https://cli.okta.com/)
* A [Microsoft Azure Account](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/free/) (Azure free account)

## Create a new ASP.NET project

Let's create a new ASP.NET project. We'll use the [.NET CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/) to scaffold the project.

Run the following commands to create the solution, the project, and add the project to the solution.

```shell
dotnet new sln -n OktaProfilePicture
dotnet new mvc --auth none --framework net5.0 -o OktaProfilePicture
dotnet sln add ./OktaProfilePicture/OktaProfilePicture.csproj
```

Now you can open the project in your favorite IDE and run the app to ensure everything runs correctly. If you are using the command line to build and serve, use the following commands.

```shell
dotnet build
dotnet run --project OktaProfilePicture
```

## Secure your app with Okta

> You'll use Okta to secure the application quickly and use their SDKs, so you don't have to spin up an identity provider and deal with the tricky details of authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll use Okta to secure the application quickly with Okta SDKs, so you don't have to spin up an identity provider and deal with the tricky details of authentication.
```
clarity, conciseness

      </div>
      <div class="form-group">
        <input type="submit" value="Save" class="btn btn-primary" />
      </div>
    </form>
  </div>
</div>

<div>
    <a asp-action="Profile">Back to Profile</a>
</div>

@section Scripts {
  @{await Html.RenderPartialAsync("_ValidationScriptsPartial");}

  <script type="text/javascript">
    const fileInput = document.querySelector('.custom-file-input');
    fileInput.addEventListener('change', (event) => {
      const fileName = event.target.value.split("\\").pop();
      document.querySelector('.custom-file-label').textContent = fileName;
    });
  </script>
}
```
{% endraw %}

Lastly, open `Views/Account/Profile.cshtml` to uncomment a line of code towards the bottom of the file. Uncomment the line that displays a button to edit profile - the line with `<a class="btn btn-primary" role="button" asp-action="EditProfile">EditProfile</a>`.

Now you should be able to edit your profile information except for your profile picture. Next we'll make it so your app persists your profile picture.

{% img blog/net-azure-cognitive-services/edit-profile.jpg alt:"Edit profile form field." width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

## Add Azure Storage

> To make your profile picture viewable, we need to persist the image somewhere. We'll use Azure Storage to do this and use a custom attribute in Okta to store a unique identifier to associate with the file in Azure. You'll be able to upload and display a profile picture in the app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make your profile picture viewable, we need to persist the image somewhere. We'll use Azure Storage to do this and use a custom attribute in Okta to store a unique identifier associated with the file in Azure. You'll be able to upload and display a profile picture in the app.
```
clarity

First, we'll create the custom attributes in Okta using the Okta admin dashboard.

> Log in to the [Okta admin dashboard](https://developer.okta.com/login/). Then navigate to **Directory** > **Profile Editor**. You should see an item named **User (default)**in the list, which is Okta's default user profile template. Select **User (default)** to open the **Profile Editor**. Press the **+Add Attribute** button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log in to the [Okta admin dashboard](https://developer.okta.com/login/). Then navigate to **Directory** > **Profile Editor**. You should see an item named **User (default)** in the list, which is Okta's default user profile template. Select **User (default)** to open the **Profile Editor**. Press the **+Add Attribute** button.
```
add space

2. Use "Person Id" as the display name for the second attribute and `personId` as the variable name.

See the image below for the "Profile Image Key" attribute inputs.

{% img blog/net-azure-cognitive-services/custom-attribute.jpg alt:"Custom attribute settings showing display and variable name for 'Profile Image Key'" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Create another attribute named `personId`. If you look at the "User (default)" user type attribute list, you should see your two new attributes listed at the bottom.

{% img blog/net-azure-cognitive-services/all-attributes.jpg alt:"User (default) user type list of attributes with the two new attributes for 'Profile Image Key' and 'Person ID'." width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Next, we'll create Azure Storage. If you don't already have an Azure subscription, [make a free account](https://azure.microsoft.com/free/?WT.mc_id=A261C142F) before you begin. We'll walk through the steps using the Azure Portal, but if you are an Azure pro, feel free to use the [Azure CLI](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli) or [Azure PowerShell](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/azure/?view=azps-7.0.0).

> Once you have an Azure subscription, open the [Azure Portal](https://portal.azure.com). Open the menu by pressing the hamburger menu on the left, and select **Storage accounts**. Press **+Create** to create a storage account. In the **Create a storage account** view, create a Resource Group if you don't already have one for test projects. I named my Resource Group "OktaDemo". Enter `oktaprofilepicture` as the storage name, select a region (Azure's default selection is fine here), and select **Standard** performance and **Locally-redundant storage (LRS)** for redundancy. Press the **Review + create** button at the bottom as the default options for the remaining selections are acceptable. Press **Create** to complete creating the storage account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have an Azure subscription, open the [Azure Portal](https://portal.azure.com). Open the menu by pressing the *hamburger menu* on the left, and select **Storage accounts**. Press **+Create** to create a storage account. In the **Create a storage account** view, create a Resource Group if you don't already have one for test projects. I named my Resource Group "OktaDemo". Enter `oktaprofilepicture` as the storage name, select a region (Azure's default selection is fine here), then select **Standard** performance and **Locally-redundant storage (LRS)** for redundancy. Press the **Review + create** button at the bottom as the default options for the remaining selections are acceptable. Press **Create** to complete creating the storage account.
```
italicize for anyone left on earth who doesn't know this has nothing to do with beef
remove an "and"

{% img blog/net-azure-cognitive-services/azure-storage.jpg alt:"Settings to create an Azure storage account." width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Next, we need to get the access keys for integrating the storage account SDK in the app. In the `oktaprofilepicture` storage account, open **Access keys** below the **Security + networking** section in the nav menu. Then press **Show keys** and copy the first **Connection string** field. Now we can move to the code!

{% img blog/net-azure-cognitive-services/azure-storage-access-keys.jpg alt:"Visual representation of steps to get connection string." width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

We're going to add a new section for Azure resources to the `appsettings.Development.json` file in the solution to connect to the Azure resource. Open `appsettings.Development.json` and add a new key named "Azure" with a property called "BlobStorageConnectionString" like the following code snippet.

```json
{
  ... Logging and Okta sections here,
  
  "Azure": {
    "BlobStorageConnectionString": "DefaultEndpointsProtocol=https;AccountName=oktaprofilepicture;AccountKey=eWlJUj.....A==;EndpointSuffix=core.windows.net"
  }
}
```

> Next, we'll need to add the packages and set up the service. You'll need to add two Nuget packages — one for Azure Storage and the other for integrating Azure clients into the DI system. Add the packages by running the following commands in the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we'll need to add the packages and set up the service. Add two Nuget packages — one for Azure Storage and the other for integrating Azure clients into the DI system. Add the packages by running the following commands in the terminal.
```
avoids the repetition of "You'll need"

```shell
dotnet add OktaProfilePicture package Azure.Storage.Blobs --version 12.9.1
dotnet add OktaProfilePicture package Microsoft.Extensions.Azure --version 1.1.1
```

Open `Startup.cs` and add the following code to the `ConfigureServices` method before `services.AddControllersWithViews();`.

```csharp
services.AddAzureClients(builder =>
{
  builder.AddBlobServiceClient(Configuration.GetValue<string>("Azure:BlobStorageConnectionString"));
});
```

We can inject the blob service client into the `AccountController` and connect to the blob container. We'll create the blob container that we'll use in the constructor. Open `Controllers/AccountController.cs` and add the blob container client as shown below.

```csharp
private readonly OktaClient _oktaClient;
private readonly BlobContainerClient _blobContainerClient;

public AccountController(OktaClient oktaClient, BlobServiceClient blobServiceClient)
{
  _oktaClient = oktaClient;
  _blobContainerClient = blobServiceClient.GetBlobContainerClient("okta-profile-picture-container");
  _blobContainerClient.CreateIfNotExists();
}
```

> You need to update the `Profile()` and `EditProfile(UserProfileViewModel profile)` methods to upload and view the blob container image. First, let's update the `Profile()` method. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update the `Profile()` and `EditProfile(UserProfileViewModel profile)` methods to upload and view the blob container image. First, let's update the `Profile()` method. 
```
conciseness

Now we want to handle the second scenario — where we want to perform facial analysis compared to the baseline facial features. We want only to allow the image to update when we have some measure of confidence that the new face image matches the baseline. Add the following snippet inside the `else` block from the code above.

```csharp
var faceId = detectedFaces[0].FaceId.Value;

var personId = new Guid((string)user.Profile["personId"]);
var verifyResult = await _faceClient.Face.VerifyFaceToPersonAsync(faceId, personId, personGroupId);

if (verifyResult.IsIdentical && verifyResult.Confidence >= 0.8)
{
  await UpdateUserImage();
}
else
{
  ModelState.AddModelError("", "The uploaded picture doesn't match your current picture");
  return View(profile);
}
```

We used a confidence level of 80% in positive identifications since we only have one facial feature for comparison. With better training, you can increase the confidence level.

Now you can upload a picture of yourself and then upload a photo of a friend to see what happens.

## Resetting profile pictures

> Sometimes you need to clear everything out and start over. I uploaded a picture of myself wearing oversized sunglasses and a hat and became no longer recognizable by the face service. 😎

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes you need to clear everything out and start over. I uploaded a picture of myself wearing oversized sunglasses and a hat, and the face service no longer recognized me. 😎
```
avoids the passive voice here for better readability

```csharp
[Authorize]
public async Task<IActionResult> DeleteProfilePic()
{
  var user = await GetOktaUser();

  await CleanAzureResources();

  user.Profile["profileImageKey"] = null;
  user.Profile["personId"] = null;
  await _oktaClient.Users.UpdateUserAsync(user, user.Id, null);
  return RedirectToAction("Profile");

  async Task CleanAzureResources()
  {
    // remove image from blob
    await _blobContainerClient.DeleteBlobAsync((string)user.Profile["profileImageKey"]);

    // remove face from Face services
    var personId = Guid.Parse((string)user.Profile["personId"]);
    await _faceClient.PersonGroupPerson.DeleteAsync(user.Id.ToLower(), personId);
    await _faceClient.PersonGroup.DeleteAsync(user.Id.ToLower());
  }
}
```

Next, open `Views/Account/Profile.cshtml` and uncomment the remaining commented out code. Doing so allows the "Delete Profile Picture" button to display.

Now you can reset your profile picture and upload that picture of you wearing a hat and sunglasses to test out the facial comparison ability.

## Learn More About Entity Framework Core, ASP.NET Core, and Okta

> I hope the tutorial was interesting to you and that you enjoyed it. You can get the [full source code of the project from GitHub](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-dotnet-azure-cognitive-services-example). For more ASP.NET Core and Okta articles, check out these posts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I hope the tutorial was interesting and enjoyable for you. You can get the [full source code of the project from GitHub](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-dotnet-azure-cognitive-services-example). For more ASP.NET Core and Okta articles, check out these posts:
```
conciseness, avoids the dangling "it" at the end.
